---
layout: post
title: "NFTs: Creation, Hosting, and Valuation"
date: 2021-04-14
---
<br/>
<h1 style="font-weight: bold; text-align: center;">NFTs: Creation, Hosting, and Valuation</h1>
<br/>
<br/>
  
*Note: The zk-STARK article is still coming soon. I had received some requests to write an article about NFTs, so I decided to post this one first!*
<br/>
<br/>

### **A short explanation of NFTs**
NFT stands for non-fungible token. Basically, it’s a way of proving digital ownership of something (typically art, but it could be many other things such as a song, video, domain name, event ticket, or in-game item), and this proof is stored on a blockchain. Exactly how this works will be explained later.

### **Intro**
NFTs have been blowing up in recent months. Long-time digital art creator Beeple is selling NFTs for millions, Tom Brady is starting his own NFT company, and Dapper Labs’ NBA Top Shot is raking in dough selling NFTs of NBA highlights without even giving up copyright ownership to the highlights. If you’ve done some research on NFTs in the past, you may have some questions.
- How do NFTs actually work?
- How are they unique?
- Who can create one?
-  Why are some worth so much?
- Could someone else create an NFT of my own work? 
- Is it worth buying one myself?

Well, I will try my best to answer most of these questions! Except the last one. As for that one, hopefully you have a better idea of your own answer after reading this article.
<br/>
<br/>

### **Creation of an NFT**
Creating an NFT, a process often called “minting”, can be done fairly easily by yourself on a blockchain or through popular NFT marketplaces like OpenSea. This can even be done for free by not transferring the NFT to a blockchain until it is first sold or transferred.

Regardless of when it happens, at some point the NFT **must** be placed on a blockchain in order to verify ownership. After it is placed on the blockchain, it is unmodifiable and receives a unique identifier. A minter can mint the same NFT multiple times if he or she chooses, but each will have its own unique identifier (non-fungible). This stands in stark contrast to typical cryptocurrencies where each token does not have a unique identifier. Most of the time, Ethereum is the blockchain of choice, but high gas fees (fees paid for interacting with the Ethereum blockchain) have pushed some to look at other options like Binance Smart Chain or Flow (created by Dapper Labs who runs NBA Top Shot). Once on a blockchain, the NFT can be bought and sold using cryptocurrency.
<br/>
<br/>

### **Detour: Smart contracts for NFTs and an example**
It is worth taking a quick detour to discuss smart contracts in the context of NFTs since they do play a big role. The creation, sale, and transfer of NFTs is governed by smart contracts, which are coded contracts that are used to specify the rules of the events and actions in the contract automatically. Ethereum-based NFTs typically use the ERC-721 standard, which is essentially a blueprint for creating NFTs that can interact with the Ethereum network by implementing a few basic required functions in a smart contract. There is also the ERC-20 standard, which is similar to ERC-721 but is used for fungible (non-unique) tokens. The smart contract, in both cases, acts as an API by providing functions to track total token supply, transfer tokens, etc. Remember though, NFTs use the ERC-721 standard.

Smart contracts can be nice for quickly brokering the sale of an NFT, establishing royalties on an NFT (for example, ensuring that the original creator gets a percentage of every subsequent sale), or even creating an NFT. A good example of this “NFT creation by smart contract” concept can be seen by examining Beeple’s “Everydays: The First 5000 Days” NFT that sold for nearly $70 million. 

When creating this NFT, Beeple used a ERC-721 token (which, as we discussed, requires a smart contract with certain functions) called MakersTokenV2. To give you a better look at how it works, let's take a look at a couple lines of the smart contract's code. One example of an ERC-721 required function is tokenURI which, when given a unique token number for an NFT, returns a link for that NFT. The code for this function in MakersTokenV2 looks like this:

```solidity
function tokenURI(uint256 _tokenId) public view returns (string) {
  require(exists(_tokenId));
  return tokenURIs[_tokenId];
}
```

This tokenURI function, when called with a specified tokenID parameter:
- Checks to make sure the the tokenId exists. If not, no need to return anything
- If it does exist, return the link stored in the tokenURIs array. Meaning, look up the link for that specific NFT and return it

Pretty simple, right?

You can actually view this MakersTokenV2 smart contract at <https://etherscan.io/token/0x2a46f2ffd99e19a89476e2f62270e0a35bbf0756#readContract>. This contract implements all functions required by the ERC-721 standard as well as a few extras. Beeple used this contract to create his NFT on the Ethereum blockchain with a unique token identifier and creator (himself). In fact, if you go to that link and ask the contract for token 40913 (the unique token ID for this NFT) through the tokenURI function, it will give you a link just like the function is supposed to. But why are we getting links instead of images or videos and why is does the link start with “ipfs”? To understand why, we first need to look at what is actually on-chain. 
<br/>
<br/>

### **What do NFTs contain?**
This is the part that many people get wrong, but it’s important because **it can play a big role in the future value of an NFT**. Perhaps surprisingly, what you probably think of as the NFT (such as an image file) is not actually stored on the blockchain. Instead, what is stored on-chain is typically a link to JSON metadata.

If you examined the metadata for an NFT and saw a link beginning with “http” that sends you to some metadata containing a link to the NFT’s file, you may open it and think that all is fine and well. However, as we know from earlier, this link can never be changed. This means that, if the server hosting the file ever goes down or the company hosting the server decides to stop hosting it, the link will point to **nothing** and the NFT may essentially be worthless unless someone can get the link back up. Hosting an NFT on a traditional URL may be fine if it is for short-term use like a sporting event ticket, or if you are confident that the servers hosting the content will not go down during the time you wish to keep ownership of it, but for long-term storage it may not be the best option. 
<br/>
<br/>

### **IPFS to the rescue**
IPFS stands for **InterPlanetary File System**, and it is a distributed file system for storing and finding content. In the case of NFTs, it allows for content to be given a unique identifier (a hash of the content called a CID) and be distributed to the IPFS network so that it can be accessed by others even if your computer is offline. This is done by “pinning” (distributing) the content to the network, which can be done through multiple services and costs a small, typically recurring fee. Content can also be unpinned by the original pinner which removes it from the network.

Many legacy browsers cannot resolve IPFS links. For instance, typing in the IPFS link from the earlier Beeple example, <ipfs://ipfs/QmPAg1mjxcEQPPtqsLoEcauVedaeMH81WXDPvPx3VC5zUz> where the “Qm…Uz” part is the unique CID, into Chrome will not get you anywhere. For this reason, some NFT’s metadata link directly to an IPFS gateway which are hosted on servers just as traditional URLs are. These gateways allow users to access the IPFS network through browsers that do not support it. While the actual file may be hosted on IPFS, if the gateway host’s servers ever go down, the NFT’s link, again, points to nothing. 

Interestingly enough, the Beeple piece we looked at earlier has this problem. That IPFS link above actually takes us to, as expected, some metadata (which, on the positive side, is stored on IPFS) that contains the actual link to the image. Guess what the image’s link begins with?<br/>
<https://ipfsgateway.makersplace.com/ipfs/QmZ15eQX8FPjfrtdX3QYbrhZxJpbLpvDpsgb2p3VEH8Bqq><br/>
That’s right, even this Beeple piece’s link is reliant on makersplace keeping their IPFS gateway up and running. Now, I’m being a little bit nitpicky here since the image itself is still stored on IPFS and could still be accessed without the gateway, but it’s still something worth thinking about because the **original** URL would no longer point to the right image. Beeple likely thought this through and went the gateway route so that people with legacy browsers could easily view the image - IPFS is not yet the most practical option, but it's likely the longer-lasting option.
<br/>
<br/>

### **IPFS concerns**
So, we have determined that NFT content accessed by a link starting with “ipfs://” is a good thing to see. Having known that, there is still a problem: what if the original artist pinned their NFT’s content to IPFS and then later, deciding that he or she wants to stop paying the small fee to keep the content pinned, **unpins** the content? There are a few possible solutions to this, but one notable one is the concept of a “warranty” that Pinata, an IPFS pinning service, brought to my attention. 

The whole warranty idea says that, after the original minter sells or transfers the NFT that he or she has created, there is a certain time period where the seller is still responsible for keeping the content hosted on IPFS. After that period expires, it should be up to the new owner to keep it pinned. Therefore, after buying an IPFS-hosted NFT, the buyer should pin it themself at soon as possible. This ensures that there is no downtime; the content is always retrievable on IPFS. 
<br/>
<br/>

### **Valuing NFTs**
Now that we know how NFTs work and some best practices for hosting them, what actually makes certain NFTs valuable? Since digital images or other files can be relatively easily duplicated, what is the point of owning the token on some blockchain other than being able to say that you own it and have the ability to transfer it? It depends.

Some NFTs can come with actual copyright ownership baked into their smart contract that is executed upon sale. For instance, if you purchased an NFT of a video that came with copyright ownership, you could claim profits generated by that video on YouTube. However, many valuable NFTs such as Beeple’s and NBA Top Shot’s **do not** come with copyright ownership. In this case, it’s more so the market determining value. I cannot tell you why some people will pay millions for certain NFTs, but some will. You could, in a way, compare it to fine art or Pokémon card pricing: **scarcity of ownership and artificial value (whether sentimental value or believed future monetary value) drive prices** (if you have an argument against this, shoot me an email - I'd love to hear it).
<br/>
<br/>

### **Could someone else create an NFT of my own work?**
I forgot to answer this one. If standard copyright law applies to whatever work was stolen to create the NFT, then you could likely request that whatever platform is listing the NFT for sale take it down. Or, if it is hosted on a traditional URL, you could try getting the hosting service to take it down. The tough part here is that there is no way to get the NFT off the blockchain, and maybe the person who minted your work is on the other side of the world or you cannot even determine who it is. NFTs are such a new phenomenon that it’s tough to fully answer this question. 

To summarize, I can’t fully answer this one, but it’s an important issue to be figured out for the future.
<br/>
<br/>

### **Closing notes**
- I hope you’ve picked up at least one new piece of information from this article. I know NFT articles are abundant, but I figured it wouldn’t hurt to have one more. I tried to include some non-obvious information as well.
- There are some theories that certain NFTs are being propped up in price by being swapped between wallets owned by one or more “co-conspirators” for increasing prices in order to give the illusion of value. These people could always re-swap the price off-chain. I did not mention this earlier because I have yet to see any hard proof of this, but know that this is always a possibility.
- As stated in the beginning note, I am still working on a zk-STARK article which should be posted soon!
<br/>
<br/>

### **Links/Additional Reading**
Twitter thread on IPFS hosting affecting current NFTs<br/>
<https://mobile.twitter.com/jonty/status/1372163423446917122>
<br/>
<br/>

Pinata (IPFS pinning company)<br/>
<https://pinata.cloud/>
<br/>
<br/>

Blog post by Robert Graham about Beeple's $69 million NFT<br/>
<https://securityboulevard.com/2021/03/deconstructing-that-69million-nft/>
<br/>
<br/>

Article about copyright law in relation to NFTs<br/>
<https://www.coindesk.com/stop-tokenizing-art-you-dont-own>
<br/>
<br/>
